My name is Dorota Rizek, and I'm a lead organizer of the New York City chapter of R-Ladies.
And so I'm going to give you a little overview of our chapter and also R-Ladies Global in general,
and then I will hand it over to Federica to introduce the Rome chapter,
and then also introduce our presenter who will be joining us shortly. So it's a collaborative
event between two R-Ladies chapters which is always fun and exciting.
All right, so let's start with just what is R-Ladies in general. So R-Ladies, also known
as R-Ladies Global, is a worldwide organization that promotes gender diversity in the R community
via meetups and mentorship events, and we always try to keep it as a friendly and safe
environment as possible. It's also been sort of shifting recently from not just R specifically,
but just programming in general. I think that's, in general, where the world is headed. So it's
good to think about other programming languages as well. So the mission is to promote and include
more women in non-binary programmers, coders, developers, speakers, and leaders. And the
goal, you know, the message and the motivation behind this is that more diversity and equity
inclusion that for people who are developing R packages and R code will lead to a better
community and just more progress in general. And the R-Ladies Global community is very large.
There's, when I looked earlier this month, there were 219 chapters across 63 countries
and almost 4,000 events that have been created,
which is just amazing to think about how wide of a reach there is across the globe.
If you are interested in starting a local chapter of R-Ladies Global, it's fairly easy to get
started. You can either email R-Ladies Global directly at info at rladies.org or you can
ping them on social media. They're usually very responsive.
So now a little bit more about my specific chapter, which is the New York City chapter.
So our chapter has a co-organizing board that's made up of, I think, nine people at this point.
It's quite a large board, but that's because we do have over 3,100 members. So our events can get
larger. And so we do our best to host monthly meetings, both in person and online, though it's
been mostly online in recent years. And you can contact us very easily. Either visit our website,
rladiesnyc.org, or you can reach out to us via email, nyc.org. And yes, our co-organizers are
these wonderful ladies and persons that just do very interesting works. Some do
bioinformatics and biostatistics. Others studied and got their PhDs in very niche-specific areas.
So it's just wonderful to be a part of a chapter and to help drive this wonderful community.
A little bit of just the timeline overall. So R-Ladies Global was born
in San Francisco back in October of 2012. And then a few other chapters popped up over the
years across the world. And that NYC chapter was born in November of 2016. And then since then,
you know, it's been eight years since then, and there's so many more chapters all over the world
that we've grown so much even as an individual chapter as well. And here is a visualization
of that growth. So we've had, we now have, again, when I made this earlier this month,
we had 3,155 members, and we've hosted a total of 110 events. And so our growth has been pretty
steady over the years, which is always really nice to see. And we pulled this data directly
from Meetup using a package called Meetup R, which was fun to play with.
And yeah, you can feel free to join us. Like I said, we do a lot of online events. So if you are
in other parts of the world, that's totally okay. We typically host Meetup talks or panels. We also
try to attend conferences and workshops, and we do book clubs and also networking
and socializing events. And those tend to be in person, but everything else is mostly online.
And ways to get involved with the New York City chapters, obviously, attend our Meetups,
and you can also follow us on our social media channels. You can join our Slack channel and,
you know, ask for resources or share resources, share job postings, things like that.
You can write a blog post for us, which we would love if you are interested in just getting some
practice with writing about R or programming or data science or data work. You can also organize.
You can submit a talk idea for us, and we'd be happy to help you develop that and give you a
platform. So, you know, share and attend and join and participate. That's the best way to be a part
of this community. And as promised here, our social media handles. We are on Facebook and Twitter.
You can also email us directly. And then if you are interested in joining our Slack,
you can send us an email, and then we'll share instructions for that. And I believe that's
everything for my slides. Any questions? Anything else I see in the chat that someone mentioned
that you've learned a lot from our Ladies' Chapters? Yes. It's a good question.
Someone mentioned that you've learned a lot from our Ladies' Chapters. Yes.
It's a really wonderful community to be a part of.
So I think with that, I will stop sharing, and I'll hand it over to Federica.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Dorota.
Thank you. Thank you, everyone, for joining us today. It's now time to end the floor over our
esteemed speaker. Tonight's event, we have the honour of hosting Dr Hadley Wickham,
Chief Scientist at PositPBC, formerly RStudio, and a renowned figure in the world of data science.
Dr Wickham is not only an adjunct professor of statistics at the University of Auckland,
Stanford University, and Rice University, but he's also a mastermind behind some of the most
widely used tools and packages in the R programming language. His contributions to the field have
revolutionised the way we approach data analysis, visualisation, and software development
in R. So tonight, Dr Wickham will be talking about R in production, sharing insights and best
practices on how to deploy R solution effectivity in the real world environment. So without further
ado, please join me in welcoming Dr Hadley Wickham. Thanks for having me, everyone.
Let me set up my sharing. Okay. Hopefully you can see my presentation now.
Okay. So I wanted to talk about R in production today. And so I'm going to start off with kind
of a broad overview of what I think that means. And then I thought it would be fun to work on
some code that I have in production, because I think it's a great example of code that even if
you're not inside a company, even if you're just learning R or your school, so this is a great way
to kind of practice some of the same skills you'll need to put code in production. And maybe
if you have the same problems as me, solve one of your problems as well. So what is R in production?
So I think of it, I'm not entirely sure what it is yet, but I can tell you what it's not. So
typically when you're putting code in production, it's code that's sufficiently important that
you're not going to run it just once. You're going to run it maybe again and again and again. Maybe
that's because you've got a new data set coming in every now and then, or maybe it's because you've
got new data coming in every day and you want to run your quarter document, produce a dashboard,
and then send that to your boss every, maybe every Monday morning. So your code is not going
to be run just once, but it's going to be run multiple times, you know, potentially over,
you know, months or years. And that's going to introduce some problems and that's going to do
some challenges, both in the way that you think about your code and the things you need to do in
your code. The other thing that's really important about in production is that code in production
is typically not going to be running on just your computer. It's going to be running on a server
somewhere. And so there's, I think a couple of differences there. The first is if you're using
Windows, that server is almost certainly going to be a Linux machine. And there are a bunch of
differences between small, but annoying differences between Windows and Linux that you're going to need
to learn about. It's also typically going to be configured as a server versus your personal
desktop. So your personal desktop probably uses the language that you speak. It probably uses the
time zone that you're in. And when you move to using a server, it's going to be using probably
English or the ASCII locale, and it's going to be using some standard time zone. The other big
challenge with running code on another computer is what happens when something goes wrong.
Like it's hard enough to debug your own code on your own computer, when you can kind of put a
browser statement in, you can do some little interactive experiments and figure out what's
going on. But now your code is running somewhere that you can't interact with. And typically it's
going to take, you know, maybe five or 10 or 30 minutes to do an iterative cycle. And that's long
enough that half the time, you know, you send the code off to run, you go and do something else,
and then you've like forgotten what you're doing when you come back to it. So that's the second
challenge. It's not running just on your computer. And the third challenge is typically in production,
your code isn't just, it's not just you working on it, it's a team of people. You've got a bunch
of data scientists colleagues who ideally need to be able to understand your code and you need to
be able to share work with. But also, you know, you've got, you might be getting data that's
produced by data engineers in your organization. You might be producing some kind of API that other
developers in your organization are going to use to get model predictions from. And you're
certainly going to be sending the results of your analyses, whether those are quarter reports or
shiny apps or something else to the decision makers. And those introduce another set of challenges.
And so today I'm going to focus on the first two, because these are ones that I think you can sell,
you can simulate reasonably well, even if you're not in an organization where you're putting stuff
in production. And because I think these are really like, if you're still a student,
if you're just getting started with data science, I think having some of these skills to be familiar
with, so you can talk about them in job interviews, really, really useful. Because it means that once
you get a job, you can hit the ground running. You can get data, you can do stuff with it,
and then you can automate that whole process. And so I'm going to show you a demo that's kind
of motivated by my use of TikTok. And one of the people I follow on TikTok is this artist
who produces these really cool sculptures. And I was like, oh, this is really cool. I would love to
own one of those. And so I went to his website. And of course, the artist's name is Weston Lambert.
And of course, every single thing is sold out. And kind of the reason it's sold out is because
he's got like 600,000 followers on TikTok. So it's not so surprising, like I don't use TikTok
that much. When he posts something new, I'm like, I don't know about this. But I really wanted to buy
one of his pieces. And so I thought, well, let's solve it. And so that is what I'm going to show
you today, my kind of production script that's going to like regularly scrape his website and
then notify me whenever something new goes on sale. So this is very much kind of like a production
type thing. You're going to run something regularly. And you kind of want someone to make
like a decision or take an action at the end of it. So I think it's kind of a good little microcosm
of production. And we're going to take a look at it. It's available on my GitHub.
I'll just drop that in the chat for you all. And I'm going to show it to you. And then it's not
very good. So I am ambitiously going to try and improve it live in front of you all. And so
hopefully I won't get too stuck. Or if I do, you can give me suggestions to get me unstuck.
So I have this open in RStudio. And the first thing I'm going to do is use the Arvis package.
And the Arvis package, if you haven't heard of it before, it's a package for basically
turning websites into tidy databases. So I'm going to go to his website,
Weston Lambert, go to the available work page, which there's now basically nothing on it apart
from a custom stand, which I don't know why anyone would just want to buy a custom stand.
But I can take that. And then I'm going to read the HTML. And the way you work with Arvis is you
select things using CSS select. So CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets. It's the language
that web developers use to describe how things should be styled. Like this should be a big,
black font. Or this should be pale gray, except when you hover over it. And the nice thing about
CSS select is they also give us a way to identify elements on the page. Now, because it's just
updated since when I looked at it yesterday, it's not going to be particularly exciting because
there's only one product available. But hopefully, my code will still work. So basically, what I'm
saying is give me and let's just, if I can look at that. Let me remember how to look at the source
code. Let's just, you can't see what I'm looking at. I'm trying to bring it back. Okay. So one of
the things which I'm going to try and show, if you ever do any web scraping, you can use the
thing that's really useful is this thing called the browser developer tools. So I'm going to right
click on this thing, this image. And we can kind of see all the HTML. You don't need to know too
much about HTML for this purpose. But the idea is that HTML is a tree. And so we're going to try
and find something like in this tree that might be useful. Because and when we kind of look up
here, we'll see there's this division of the page with an ID called product list. Right. And so that
seems like a fairly good place to start. And so the way you select something with an ID is to put a
hash in front of it. And so this is going to give me that element. And then I know everything inside
of that is going to be a link and a link as a K tag. So I can look at these products now.
And unfortunately, there is only one. This would have been more exciting yesterday.
But now I need to look at a look at this element. So let's see what this A is. Let's see what's
inside of it. We need to try and figure out like how where's the price.
So you can see down here, this is kind of useful. It's got a class called product price
and it's got a class called product title. These, you know, that's pretty suggestive. So I can use
another selector. I'm going to say find all the elements with a class, a product title and extract
the text. That gives me custom stand and I could do the same thing with the price.
The price is some extra text and it has some dollar signs. So I just strip all those out
and convert it to an actual number. And there's lots of other ways I could do this. In particular,
this would be much easier. If I could use read out because I could just use
read out past number and that would do that all for me.
But one of the things that's interesting about code and production is that your code is going
to run somewhere else. Right. And that means all of your package, all of the packages you need and
you run the analysis are also going to need to be copied somewhere else. So when you're running
production, like minimizing the number of packages you use is really going to make your life easier.
And I noticed that a few people are asking in the chat about my little arrows
and triangles here. This is actually a font that they use, which again, we said that
appearance. I'm using this font called Fiero Code, which provides ligatures. So ligatures
kind of custom displays for. So if I put a space in between them, you can see that it's just a
regular vertical bar and a greater than symbol. Similarly, this is a less than sign followed by
a minus. But Fiero Code just makes that look a little bit nicer. With the unfortunate side
effect of confusing people when you show them your code. Now, unfortunately, today there are no
sold out items. So you're going to have to rely on the fact that I figured this out earlier,
that there happens to be a, when they're sold out, it happens to have an element on it
called sold out. And then also I can figure out where the actual product is.
So I found out all these different variables and I should say, I think I
like this scraping isn't kind of the main point of this talk, but I'll point you to a talk.
If I can remember where it was that I gave about this recently.
Oh my God, I create so many, here we go. So if you do want to learn that this is kind of
interesting, you do want to learn more about web scraping. This is a workshop I gave a couple of
months ago that will help you learn a little bit more. Okay. So where are we? So what have we done?
We now, and so I've now taken each of those pieces and I put them all together in a data frame.
So this is not very exciting because there's only one row. But in principle, what I want to do now
is say, well, let's take a look at the products I saw last time, which I saved as a CSV file.
And so last time there were these 10 things for sale. Also, I mostly sold out.
So what I want to do is find which ones are new and are not sold out.
And so I'm using this link as kind of a unique identifier, right? So I'm saying,
if I've seen it before, don't tell me about it again. So if I've seen it before,
don't tell me about it again. And so what I'm going to do is find all of the rows
where sold out is missing. So they're not sold out. And the link is not present in the last set
of links. So this should find the one that's missing. And then I'm going to find the one
that's not present in the last set of links. So this should find, I should add a comment here,
find all products that aren't sold out. I didn't see last time.
And then I'm going to create, if there are any products, I'm going to create a little message.
Which didn't work. And now I have to figure out why didn't that work?
Let's just try one of those. So that worked. Oh, I see. When I looked at old,
there already was a custom standard. Okay. So this is doing the right thing.
It's saying there are no new products that you haven't already seen because
this custom standard was on sale last time you checked it.
But I'm going to update the products on CSV file. And now since this is on Git switch,
you can't see in the share. Let's just see if I can change that.
So in the Git pane, now effectively what I'm going to do is update products data.
And actually before I do that, I should probably just make sure I should have done this when I
started, but I probably want to get the latest changes. Okay. So now there isn't actually any
changes in Git because, which I'll show you shortly, I actually have a GitHub action that
is running this automatically, but that's just a basic idea. So what have I done?
So I scraped the website with Arvist. You saw that. And I created a tidy table of data.
The next thing I'm going to show you is how I repeatedly rerun this. So if we go to the GitHub
site and we look at the commits, you'll see this repo actually has 319 commits in it.
Most of them have the same, not very useful title. But if I look at one of these,
you can see this is updating a CSV file with the changes to the website.
So just having this, just this alone is quite useful. Right now I've converted a website into
a CSV file and I'm tracking the changes over time with Git. So now at least you could look at this
and kind of say, well, how often do things actually sell out? How often does he add new
mystery sculptures to the website? Or you could maybe start to do some more analysis.
Like, well, if I want to look at his website, what time should I go?
And the reason this works is I use a GitHub action. So GitHub actions are something
that are free for everyone to run, open source repos at least, or publicly available repos.
And I've set this one up to automatically run, what this means is every three hours.
So every three hours, I'm going to run a GitHub action. So I'm going to run a GitHub action.
What's it going to do? It's going to check out the repo. So this is kind of common when you're
running something in production, often you're going to start with a completely blank slate.
You just get given like a Linux machine that has nothing on it, basically. So the first thing I'm
going to do is check out my code. Then I'm going to use some code that we provide through the
Rlib actions repo that's going to install R. So every time this runs, we're going to install R.
We're going to check out my code and then install R. Then we need to install all the
dependencies I need for my package. And now I can actually run that script.
So that's not quite enough, because I also need to check that back into Git. And
I wish I could tell you how I got this code, but I can guarantee to you, I did not write this
myself because I do not really, I do not remember doing that. And I don't remember why I need stuff
like this there. But I think I wrote a comment here that this is the kind of idea that I copied
from Simon Willison. And he used a slightly different approach, but pretty similar idea.
So what I've done, so what's going on with the script? I start with a completely blank slate.
I'm going to get my code out. I'm going to install R. I'm going to install all the dependencies I
need. I'm going to run my script. And then I'm going to save the results. And if you go back
And if you go back enough in time,
I want this 300 commits here. I don't know how far. We'll go back a while.
Quite a while.
So I guess this has just been running, been running for a while. Okay. You can see like
there's a lot of initial commits where there's quite a lot of iteration to get this working
correctly. But I eventually got it working correctly. And once it did, it just has been
running tirelessly every three hours, updating whenever the site changes for the last eight
months. So I see Philippe in the chat asked a good question, which how does it figure out my
dependencies? I actually created a description file here. Not because this is a package, which
always has a description, but just because we've got some easy tools to install dependencies. If
you do have a description, one of the things you probably should do, one of the things,
the downsides of this approach is it's going to install the latest version of your package. It's
going to install the packages that are currently available on CRAN, which is not a great idea.
So the other thing it's supposed to do is send a push notification.
Unfortunately, this push notification, I never actually got it to work. But I did a little
exploration yesterday and I think we can change it to work. I realized a couple of minutes ago,
my goal was to like do this push notification and then show you on my phone.
But I forgot that I also use my phone as my webcam, so that's going to require some gymnastics.
But I'm using this repo, which I'm going to from John O'Carrill.
Just seeing that using this free website called Notify.
The only feature is that it's free, basically, and it does just what we need. So I'm going to
just show you how to do that. So I'm going to go to my website. I'm going to go to my
only feature is that it's free, basically, and it does just what we need.
So I'm going to just try. I've created a ramp and Notify is basically public to everyone.
And so the way we get around that is we create a topic name that's basically just a random name.
So you can sign up for these notifications. If you quickly copy this URL down,
you put in the chat, actually, it's not a big deal. And now from R, I can run some code.
And run that.
And then, hopefully, I got a link. I got this notification.
And so the cool thing about this is as well as being like a desktop app, it's also an iPhone app.
So I actually get a push notification. So let's, well, I can, I got, I got it came to my watch,
which I can't show very easily, but you can see I got a notification.
I got a notification on my watch telling me that something has happened on that website.
So this is pretty, I think this is pretty cool. Like I've now got all the pieces in place
so that when something changes on this website, I'm going to get a notification and I can
actually go and use it. And that did, in fact, work successfully for me.
And I purchased this sculpture, which I really, really like.
Okay. So I wanted to, let's maybe, so that's the code. So let's,
let's maybe just talk a little bit more about, I think, like some of the challenges you'll face
when putting code into production. And then, depending on how long that takes,
we can kind of come back and maybe make some improvements to this code.
So let's, so let's think about some of the challenges based with this. And for this
particular example, I'm going to ask you to imagine that you're a data scientist
working for an ice cream store. And all of my images are drawn by chat,
GPT, which is notoriously bad at words. So please enjoy the terrible spelling as we go.
So you're a data scientist for an ice cream company. You want to help them predict how many
ice creams are going to sell tomorrow, maybe based on how many ice creams they sold today
and the weather forecast for tomorrow. And so you've written a bunch of R code,
you've fit some models, and you've made a nice Kordo notebook,
which I love, the variable that's decided our importance, which is like humidity. Well,
maybe that's a good one. And holiday, that's probably a good one. I've got no idea what
Simspot is, or Simr, or Commodores. But you've made this wonderful notebook, and now you want
to like run this every day so that the people who are in charge of making ice cream in your
organization or shipping it out to the store know what to do.
And so what are the challenges to doing that? Well, the first challenge is that the data is
going to change. I mean, hopefully, I think this is probably the most obvious, right,
that you know, like in winter, sales of ice cream are likely to drop. But if you've never had,
if you've never had a cold, you know, you've never had a fever, you've never had a cold,
you've never had a cold, you've never had a cold, you've never had a cold, you've never had a cold,
sales of ice cream are likely to drop. But if you've never had, if you don't have data about
winter, like if you don't have enough data going back into time, the first time you see
something unusual like that, you're going to get bad predictions. Another thing that might happen
is that the schema of the data might change. So the schema is kind of the definition
of the data, like one of the variable types, one of the variable names. So maybe you'd be
working with data like this. Obviously, your company does not make weather forecasts, right?
So you're downloading this from some API, some of the internet. And one day it changes.
So what I want you to do is just take a minute, think about this stuff. You might put ideas in
the chat if you want. Like, what's the difference? What are the differences between these two data
frames? And what do you think the impact on your code is likely to be? Like, I haven't shown you
any code. I just want you to imagine, like, what do you think these changes are going to do? So
let's just take a minute. And what I want you to do, see if you can identify the three differences
and think about what the impact is going to be.
I see lots of ideas coming up in the chat.
Thank you. I've got them all. So what are the differences? So the most obvious difference
is that temp and temperature have changed. Temp has changed to temperature. So what's
the likely impact of this on your code? You're probably going to get an error message, right?
Which is good. Which is kind of the best thing that could possibly happen compared to some of
the changes we'll talk about next. So that's good because it tells you that the format's
changed and you have to go back to your code and fix it. What else has changed? Well, we've
changed from a date format, the ISO 8601 date, which is used commonly in Europe, to month,
day, year format, which is used commonly in America. So what might happen here? I think
you've got a few different options. First of all, your code might just error because you've hard
coded that you expect it to be in year, month, day format. It might just work because it's
automatically guessing the date types from the column. Or in the worst possible scenario,
it might guess that these are day, month, year data. So in this subset of data, this is all valid
dates. This could be the 5th of January, the 5th of February, the 5th of March, the 5th of April,
which, as humans looking at this, we're likely to say that that seems implausible. This is
definitely year, month, day. But if you're very unlucky, it might automatically guess the wrong
date. And now you're just going to get nonsense. Your code isn't going to error. It's just going
to get bad results. And it's the same thing that might happen that's almost certainly going to
happen with the last one, where it's changed from Celsius, Centigrade, to Fahrenheit.
Like this is still a number. It's still a valid number. But if you fit your model on Celsius,
and now you're giving it Fahrenheit, you're going to get terrible predictions out of that.
And you're not going to know that, right? There's nothing that's not going to throw an error. You're
just going to be getting really bad results out of that. And so that's kind of like the worst
possible scenario for code that's running in production, right? It doesn't error. It just
silently gives the wrong results. Okay, so those are the first two challenges. Like,
you might get data you've never seen before. Another place this might arise, for example,
is maybe originally the ice cream store was only open on the weekends. And now it's also open on
weekdays. And so you might get new data, maybe the day of the variable, the day of the week is
something that's important. And now you're going to get new days of the week you need to make
predictions. The schema might change. Or maybe one of your dependencies changes.
So maybe there's a great new version of your favorite package comes up. And it adds a bunch
of cool new features that you love and think are amazing. But it also breaks one of your existing
plots because something no longer works. Maybe that's because
you were relying on a bug. Maybe it's because the ggplot2 developers made a mistake. Maybe
they made some deliberate change. But for whatever reason, your code no longer works
because you are installing the right, the current version every day. Now, there's a
really good fix for this, and that's to use rn. Let's see if I can do that quickly just to show
you. And the basic idea of rn is it's going to capture all of the versions of the packages that
you're currently using. So there's only two, there's only one, well, one package here,
rvst and one package here that I'm using, notify. But it captures all of the packages
that those packages depend on as well. And it records all that information in a lock file.
And now in my GitHub action,
instead of set up our dependencies, I could use set up something else whose name I've forgotten.
And I will just quickly look that up.
Actions, set up rn.
So I've changed this, so there's now an rn lock file. If I look at that lock file,
there's a JSON file. But most importantly, you can see it's got the version of every single
package I have installed. So now when this runs on GitHub, it's going to run exactly the
same versions of those packages, even if new packages are released at the time.
So by and large, like dependencies changing, I think it's kind of a solved problem,
because you can just capture all of the dependencies at one point in time using
rn, but there's some other similar tools, but I think rn is my favorite.
Another thing that might change is maybe the entire platform changes. So maybe there's a new
chip that comes out, and maybe there's some difference in how it does linear algebra,
and it gives slightly different results to your model. Or maybe the operating system changes,
or maybe the C libraries of the packages you use depend on change, or maybe the version of R
or Python changes. This is much, much, much less common, particularly these days,
but there have been some particularly famous examples in the past where I remember something,
I guess, like 20 plus years ago, where an Intel chip had a bug in its math
operations. So a bunch of people got incorrect results in their scriptures.
So this is not very common, but good to be aware of. And the way that people tend to fix this
solve this problem in practice is to use containers. This is why you might have
prepared a container that basically just captures an entire operating system in a box.
You can just ensure that every time your code runs, it's running on exactly the same version.
The other challenge that you might face is the universe might change.
So in the case of an ice cream store, like maybe it's because your shop changed location.
And obviously, like if it's now on a beach instead of in the city,
like the sales patterns are likely to be very different. But your code is just going to keep
going. It's just going to keep producing. It's going to keep fitting the model that
worked for you originally. Maybe that model doesn't fit very well, but it's not going to
give you a good result. And worse, it's not going to give you a clear error that says,
hey, the model's wrong because models kind of, by their very nature, can't do that.
And so you might've heard of terms like concept drift or model drift or data drift.
But I think the basic idea is that like a model is by its very nature an imperfect,
it captures reality imperfectly, and it captures it best at the time it was fit.
And as you get further away from that time, like more and more little errors are going to creep
up. So even if nothing major changes, like if you only fit your model once and make predictions from
it, those predictions only get worse and worse over time because this kind of, you've somehow
implicitly fit like a Taylor series approximation to the universe. And as you move away from that
approximation point, it's going to get worse and worse. And the way you kind of could resolve that
is you can't just like sit and forget the model. You're going to have to regularly check it.
In the case of like my little production thing, I think what the universe changing would look like
is this looking different, like the structure of the HTML page changing.
And the way that Arvis works is if it doesn't find anything, if I deliberately introduce a
misspelling, it's going to report nothing. So I think this is something in my code here,
what I really should be doing is saying like, if my products equals zero,
I need to throw an error. And that means my script isn't going to continue running,
even though the structure of the website has changed. And I'm now just getting nonsense
results. And the nice thing about doing an error like this is that when you are running
R in batch mode, so if you remember in my scraping script, it calls R script.
And if you call R script instead of using R interactively, whenever there's an error,
it's basically going to quit and it's not going to run any more code. And when that quits,
it's going to notify GitHub actions. And then that will give you an error that you get notified
about through your GitHub notifications. So a lot of making, I think writing production
ready code is thinking about like, how could the inputs to my code change in such a way that the
code still works, but it gives me nonsense responses. So another thing that maybe you
could do here is something like this. Price is less than zero.
And at least encourage you to come and like, take a look at that problem.
The last challenge of like running repeatedly running code and production is that over time,
your requirements are going to change. And in some ways like the best and worst thing that
can happen to you as a data scientist is if like something you've done, some dashboard you've
created as a model that becomes so important that the executives in your company start to rely on
it. And that's awesome because your work is having a very direct impact on the company,
but it also means those people are going to be looking at it and emailing you with requests to
change it. And I don't know, I don't think that's a problem necessarily, but I think like dealing
with that kind of like iterative flow of request is not something that like data scientists tend
to be trained in. It's not something you to learn in university. So how you like keep track of those,
how do you make sure that you continue doing the work that is important to you as a data scientist,
even while you get requests from like several layers above you in the old chart to do things
urgently, like how do you balance that? How do you balance working on the things that are like
important versus the things that are urgent because someone else
are in the old chart that you really want to see.
So those to me are kind of the things you need to think about when you're writing code that's like
running long term. So let's just take a look at this. We've already kind of seen an example of
the data changing, right? Like I looked at that today and there was only one product there,
which made this much less interesting than it might have been. The schema, I mean, maybe in
this case, it's kind of hard to say whether it's the universe or the schema that's changing
at the HTML structure of the website change. So one thing that makes me a little bit more
comfortable about scraping this, as you can see, it's powered by Squarespace, which is a big
website that powers tons of websites. So I kind of know behind the scenes, like this is all automated.
Someone's not manually handwriting this HTML. It's likely to be generated by code and it's unlikely
for that code to change in the short run. It might change in the long run and that is why I really
should add code like this to check that it hasn't because otherwise my code will just continue
working, return a zero low row data frame, everything else will work, but I just don't get any notifications.
So we can protect against changes to dependencies, as I said, by using RN, which basically works by
recording all of the changes. I've already protected against changes in the platform because
in my YAML file, well, I've almost protected against it because I say run on Ubuntu latest.
And so this is the container. This is the operating system and all the system libraries
that GitHub is going to use to run my code and we can maybe figure out
what that means and how often that changes.
So I could actually, if I wanted to be safer,
change it to a specific version of Ubuntu. So now rather than using the latest released version
of Ubuntu, I'll always use Ubuntu version 20. And in this case, I don't think it's that important
because none of this code is like very, very simple code. It's kind of easy to see
what might go wrong and I don't think the operating system is likely to impact it.
And like operating systems change relatively slowly anyway, and I don't expect to be running
this script for years on end. But again, this is something I could do. I could lock down a
specific version of the operating system. So to isolate that from the source of all possible
opportunities. So for platform changing, we also talked about the universe changing.
In this case, the universe changed because I successfully purchased the artwork that I wanted
to purchase. And then the script is no longer useful. That's I think a not uncommon result
of a data science project, right? You actually might.
Ms. Hadley Pearson.
Okay.
Sorry about that. I just lost power. But I am back. Hopefully we will not lose power again.
Okay. Let me share my screen again. Oops.
And let me regain my thought. We talked about platform, the universe. Yes. In this case,
the universe changed the data analysis in production and its desire to infect,
and I can now effectively wrap that up. Not super uncommon. Sometimes you do an analysis just to
get something to change. It's changed, and then you're done.
Or maybe that was the requirements changing, because in this case,
I got what I needed out of the analysis. So I think that's probably a good place to start.
I kind of showed you a few ways I could make this code more kind of production-ready by adding in
more errors so that when something goes wrong, I get notified about the script. I also spent a
little bit of time yesterday figuring out how I could get rid of this dependency on the notify
package to make my code even simpler, which I should put in there because it's kind of nice.
And that just means I'm no longer using the notify package, but I'm using
the HTTP package to do this directly.
No real reason to do that, except that I think if you were doing this and just putting this
code in production in a real company, it gets pretty hard to use code from random GitHub repos,
because that code could change at any point, and many IT departments will not let you just use
random code from the internet. So I think let's stop there, and we've got some time for questions.
I will not tell you about some of the challenges of not just my computer, but you did see a few
of those along the way, and I will tell you the absolute, the thing that is hardest to debug
is when this doesn't work, right? Because when this doesn't work, all that happens is you don't
get a message, which is obviously very difficult to detect. So I think any of these problems,
like you should expect some pain and frustration, especially when you do it the first time.
I think there are a lot of, like one of the advantages to using tools, commercial tools,
like Posit Connect, is that they actually help you figure out when something didn't
run and didn't do something, which is the hardest case to figure out.
So let's stop there and take questions from Slack.
Peter, do you want to ask them, or do you want me to just pick them out and read them?
I've just unmuted all, so if you like, if they want to ask you directly a question, they can.
There is something in the chat already.
One, Avis, would you like to read the question and ask the question yourself?
Yes, I can read. I have two questions. The first one is about this web scraping. Apart from
R Selenium package, are there any other R packages which can scrape JavaScript-managed web pages?
And the second question is about this data drift. How to automatically identify such drifts?
Thank you. So these are my answers. First, Avis now has experimental tools for scraping live
pages that run JavaScript. So this actually runs a web browser in the background and interacts
with it. So you can interact with any website exactly as you're a real person. To echo one
of the questions earlier in the chat, I will not be telling you how you can do this to scrape
Ticketmaster or other places like that. I will say these techniques generally don't work on any
website where you can imagine people really care about scraping, because Ticketmaster wants to
stop people from scraping it because they don't want to enable scalping. So they introduce a
bunch of tools to stop that, which, of course, you can overcome if you're creative enough. But
I would never suggest such a thing. Identifying data drift, I think, is more challenging.
I'm kind of surprised there's not more research and interest in this. I think the best thing I've
come up with or was suggested to me was this applicable package that Max Kuhn suggested.
And basically what the applicable package does is every time you make a prediction,
it tells you how far away from the training data is that prediction.
And so I think that just seems like something you probably want with every prediction. Am I
making a prediction that's solidly in the body of data that I've seen before and I can feel really
confident? Or am I making a prediction that's a very long way away from the data that I used to
put the model, in which case I should take that with a grain of salt? Or maybe if it's even far
enough away, I should automatically flag that and encourage people to refit the model.
And there's sort of a similar vote by Vera from my colleagues, Julia and Isabel,
help you set up this regular cycle of model assessment and monitoring so that when your
model does drift away from reality, you've got some chance of catching that.
Isabel, would you like to ask the question directly?
So she said, I've used the package that notifies you in Slack and that you work great.
Maybe you want to say something?
It was not really a question. It was just that that was an alternative to use for the notifications
instead of the notify.
Yeah, there's like a ton of packages out there. I think Slack is useful. One of the things that I
like about notify is I think the only like there's just so little. Yeah, but it's like free and you
don't have to worry about like one of the other things that's like painful about putting stuff in
production is how do you get all of your credentials shared correctly? And so like if I was going to
publish to Slack, like I need to somehow get either my Slack username and password, which
would be kind of a probably a bad idea to put that on my GitHub or some kind of like token that's
like could give me and it's just like a bunch more work. But I think if you're doing this like
kind of inside your organization. Yeah, it was like this. Yeah, really. I was running it from
my computer, but the only step that was not optimized was when the code was run. That step
was still run. It depend on when the data was generated. It was sequencing data. So I was
waiting for the sequencer to finish. But then the good thing is that the lab would get notifications
and especially it was about the results. If some of the data was out of the threshold that we were
expecting, the lab will know that there was probably an error in sequencing and they could
fix it. So it would work. And I put everything in GitHub except of the credentials. That part
was ignored. So the file with that was ignored. So I didn't have that problem.
Yeah, another package that if you're just doing that kind of like long running thing locally is
BPAR, which is like make your computer play some music. That's like super low stakes. But I think
that idea of like notifying not just you, but potentially a channel on Slack is like a really
powerful idea. Even I was adding like plots so they could see the results. That was the problem.
So they could really see, hey, this plot, like it makes no sense. Probably we have an error
because there was an input of data that was manual, that was created by the lab technicians.
And if they would make an error when they were preparing that file, the data make no sense. So
I needed to tell them as soon as possible, your data, it makes no sense. Fix the file.
Yeah, makes sense.
I see David asked a question about how you manage credentials in production.
There's like two ways, I think. There's the way that's not
particularly secure. It's OK. It's like, OK, it's fine. That works everywhere. And that is to use
environment variables. And so like locally, what that means is you could run a script like
edit our environment, which I'm not going to run because I will show you all my environment
variables, which contain a bunch of secret stuff. But you can like put them like the kind of the
basic idea is you have this one file like your dot our environment file,
which contains a bunch of things that never gets committed to GitHub. And then on GitHub.
Under settings.
And secrets and variables. You can add these.
There's something that confuses me. I think I want a repository secret.
So once you've said it, you can never actually see it again.
But you can't edit it. You can only replace it. But you can. There are ways you can read that
into an environment variable in your GitHub actions. So you have to be careful to never like
print that out. Although GitHub does take some basic precautions to make sure you don't
accidentally do that. But that allows you to have kind of something that's like secrets
locally and secret anywhere else. So this environment variables thing basically works
everywhere. But it's kind of a pain because it typically relies on you doing some kind of
copy and paste. One of the things that we've been trying to work on and now and part of this
professional product is making it all kind of just work. So if you're using Databricks or Snowflake,
all of the credentials kind of magically flow through. And I think that's like in
like a well resourced organization, that's the way it should work. Like your administrator should
kind of take care of making all of this auth stuff that you don't need to worry about it.
Until we get to that point, environment variables that you
do whatever you need to do, wherever you need to do it, basically.
OK, thank you. There is a question from Eugene. I don't know if you want to ask him, but
I share the question as well. I wanted to ask myself, what is the future looking like for R?
Yeah, I'll preface your remarks. I think like this is Yogi, Yogi, Eric, I think.
Like making predictions, it's tough. Yeah, I guess it's tough to make predictions,
especially about the future. So I don't know. I don't know what's going to happen.
So I don't know. I don't know what's going to happen. I would say
like it feels like I think one of the things that make it hard to kind of
like get a sense for like what's up with R is I think like the absolute number of R users
is still increasing. But the percentage of people using R for data science is decreasing
because the number of people using Python for R is increasing faster.
Now, like and I think like the like, you know, don't get me wrong, Python is a great language.
And I think the reason more and more people are using it for data science is it's a great
general purpose programming language. But I don't think it's reasonable for there to just
be like one programming language. Like I think it makes sense to have some general purpose tools
and more special purpose tools. And while R is like a general purpose programming language,
you can do anything you want in R. It's definitely like well, particularly well tailored for the
needs of data science. And I think the design of R means, in my biased opinion, that tools like
ggplot2 and dply are always going to be better in R than basically any other programming language.
Because no other programming language gives you the flexibility to implement those sort of APIs,
which give you this very fluent interface for exploring data. And I still, you know, I think
still think ggplot2 and dply are better than their Python equivalents. And I think they always will
be. Like, what is that? Is that like enough for R to survive in the long run? I don't know. Like,
I hope so. I have no intentions to not to stop using R. Like, I will continue to, you know,
do my darnedest to make sure that R stays competitive and around in the long run. Because,
you know, I love it. And I think it's a great, it's a really great environment.
It's hard to tell the impact of like generative AI on this. Because in some ways it makes,
massively reduces the cost of switching languages. Because you can ask, you can
like generate, you can ask it to help you learn the program in languages.
And at the same time, like I am also, like the thing that makes it easier for me to keep going
is like when I started using R, it was like maybe they had maybe like 1% of the users today.
So, you know, I've been using it for a very long time since before it got popular. So,
it doesn't like maybe if it goes up and then declines, but I don't know, maybe that's okay.
And I kind of hope that, I don't know, my hope is that like Posit as a company, we get really good
at producing Python tools. And so that when Python data scientists are in a company, they say,
yeah, we really need to buy Posit products. And then that just like automatically supports all
the R users as well. Because there's still, there's always going to be people who love R
and Posit and devote their lives to it. So, my hope would be that sort of becomes a Trojan horse,
that we can make it good enough that Python people demand it. And then the R users just
get a free ride, which is very much not what happens today. So, I don't know. I'm still,
you know, I have, it's, I don't know. It's tough to, I don't know. It's tough. It's definitely
scary. It's definitely worrying. And I think I like kind of compounded with me personally for
like the, at least the personal, Twitter is dead to me personally. That just means like,
it feels like the R community has shrunk massively because I don't have that regular
interaction with so many people from around the world. And so it's just all of these, you know,
plus the pandemic, just everything kind of, I don't know, happening at once, like same changes,
the world changes. I don't know. I think it's probably worthwhile for everyone. Like, you know,
don't put all your, I'm blanking on the, don't put all your somethings in one something.
I'm blanking on the idiot. But that, you know, it's useful to be diversified,
right? Like you want to be really strong in some areas, but be always willing to learn.
Like at some point in your career, you're going to have to learn another programming language.
You're going to, R is going to go away at some point. Maybe it's in 10 years, maybe it's in 50
years, but I don't imagine existing for the rest of humanity. So you just have to accept like
things change over the point of your career, the course of your career, and that's fine. And
I don't know, that's a very long, rambly, vague answer, but that's the best I've got.
Yeah, thank you. Maybe, sorry, sometimes can be annoying when you,
you know, you get proficient and now, you know, some fluency in one language and then you need to,
you know, but if you do that, like, that you keep looking at other languages while you are using
your favorite one, it might be easier. But, you know, it's hard.
Yeah, and I will say that one of the things that impresses me most about JJ, who's my boss,
who wrote, you know, the RStudio ID and many other things, is that pretty regular, like every
five years, he just throws himself into a new field, potentially a new programming language,
and just tackled something that he's like never done before. And I think that's an incredible
skill. I kind of like, I wish I had that in some ways, I can like throw myself into the unknown
and to go back to that point where you're like, everything is so hard and so frustrating. And to
do that, like again and again and again, I think that's like, it's incredible. It's kind of like a
superpower. Thank you. So there's more questions. Alex.
Yes. Hello. Can you hear me? Yeah.
Yeah. Hadley, first of all, thank you for your great book for data science. It's really helped
me for my career. So thank you so much. And my question is, for example, if someone works with
sentiment analysis, and he uses both R libraries and transformers libraries, what is more reliable
and robust for production? Would it be better to use your own code, your own libraries, which don't
depend on external APIs, or you should experiment with transformers? So how you make- Yeah.
I mean, this is always the balance of taking dependencies, like the more dependencies you use,
the higher the chance of something outside of your control going wrong.
But the fewer dependencies you use, like the more work you have to do yourself,
and you have to kind of balance that, like, what's the likelihood of me doing this correctly
and performantly versus something going wrong with something else?
I would say, like, my hope, and if this is not true, I would hope we would fix it,
is that, like, Reticulite plus RN, which also captures your Python dependencies,
should give you a pretty robust experience, at least in the terms of, like, everything works
today, and if it works today, I want it to keep working tomorrow and the day after forever and
ever. It's going to be more challenging to, like, debug when things go wrong, because you're
crossing multiple language barriers, but I don't think it should cause problems in production.
And ironically, in some ways, like, I know Reticulite makes it much, and Keras and similar
wrappers make it easier to install things in Python sometimes from R than in Python themselves,
because, like, one of the things that we believe in is that, like, installing software shouldn't
be a pain, and so there's a lot of effort put into, like, Keras. Keras, I'm sure, has a,
you know, like, an install Keras function, which, you know, we do our best to make sure it works reliably.
But now it's Keras 3, so it's much better.
Much better.
To solve some issues, I have to, so I've turned around some, you know, installation issues,
setting a Python path, then I changed the machine, so I had to do that again, but
so Keras 3 has this issue, so that's a nice, very nice Python connection.
Okay, thank you very much. I don't know if you've got time. We have a couple of questions more.
Maybe let's, I have a good answer for one of them, so could we do the question from Melissa?
Melissa, I don't know if you want to ask that, or I can just tie it into an answer.
Hi, yeah, I'll ask the question. Your definition of what's in production, I think, is a lot broader
than what people traditionally think of, so, you know, I have lots of projects into production now
based on your definition, and what are your thoughts on meshing that definition with a
more traditional one where it's more IT-focused, and I think the friction comes up a lot more
often. Yeah, let me find you. I have a slide from the last talk, which I decided to not
clear the slide today, but it's very relevant.
And I, like, I'm talking about, like, I think this distinction is so helpful to make that
there's R in lowercase P production and R in uppercase P production, and uppercase P production
is, like, often what people are talking about, where it's, like, something is so mission-critical
to your organization that if it stops working, you'll get paged, right? If it stops working at
3 a.m. on a Sunday morning, you will get woken up, and you will need to fix it,
and most of the time, like, most data science stuff does not go in that level of production,
and so while I think you can put, kind of, R in this, like, uppercase P production, you don't
actually want to put your data scientists in uppercase P production because they don't want
to be woken up at 3 a.m. in the morning. Like, that's not, kind of, what I've signed up for
as data scientists, so this, kind of, lowercase P production, which is more about, like,
it's running regularly, it's running on another machine, like, that's great, and because, like,
every organization, if you look hard enough, has, like, Excel running in production, by which I
mean there's, like, some critical Excel sheet that is regularly looked at, regularly updated,
and if it broke, like, senior people in your organization would be pissed off, so if you can
put Excel in production, like, in that sense, you can certainly put R in production, and I think a
lot of it is just trying to figure out, like, a lot of the challenges around, like, vocabulary and,
kind of, you know, people in IT and data science use the same words to mean different things,
and I think a lot of it is, like, trying to figure out how to have, like, productive
conversations about these issues, but, yeah, definitely, I think, like, definitely a challenge,
because people think, like, it has to be this, like, big all-or-nothing production thing,
and Tarif has this really nice analogy, which is, like, you know, production is, like, going out,
like, capital P production is, like, going out for a restaurant meal, where it's being prepared
professionally by chefs, and that's great, but that doesn't mean that, like, home cooking isn't
great as well, right, and so you're, like, many data science dashboards, it's more like home cooking,
it's not, like, the professionally prepared food slash dashboards, it's, like, running your
organization, maybe it's only looked at, like, once a week by a handful of decision makers,
but it's still useful, it's still important, it just doesn't need to get to that same level.
Thank you.
Should I take one last question, do you think, Federica?
There are two questions we haven't addressed, like, what do you think about the R code generated
by GenAI, and can we use the code for the production, and then USDA and ASS embrace R
within the last five years, and add the nearer to 100 internal users, it's going to be okay,
so that's not, you know, if any of you would like to answer the last question to
Dr. Hadley, please do it, so this is your chance before we end this meeting.
Okay, so I think it's just, what about AI, what's going to, you mentioned something, but.
Yeah, again, I don't know, I would encourage, like, everyone to, like, try it out, whether it's
by, like, copilot or chat GPT, it feels like it's going to be, like, I don't know what impact
it's going to have, but it feels like the impact is going to be big. I'm using it in my code,
it's, I don't know, it's kind of interesting that it's not, sometimes it's really annoying,
because it keeps suggesting things that I'm like, that's not right, and it's just something else,
and I'm like, that's not right, and then I'm just like, just stop, like, stop, shut up,
like, you're distracting me, and other times, it's like, and it's really good at writing
sort of boilerplate-y code, in a way that I'm like, is this good, because it just makes me,
like, instead of kind of copying and pasting, it just sort of splats it all in, and I'm like, well,
if I had to write that by hand, I'd probably, like, rethink it a little bit more, but it's
already written, so I'll just keep it. It's, yeah, I don't know, it's really interesting,
I think I would, and I don't know, like, how, like, you know, I've spent a lot of time writing
R code, and so I can read the R code, and pretty quickly, like, assess, is this good or not, or is
this likely to do the right thing, although sometimes, even that, given that sometimes,
like, it tricks me, because it gives, like, the name of a function, or the name of the argument
that just seems so perfectly suited for what I want it to do, I'm like, how did I know that
that doesn't exist, and then I run it, and the reason I didn't know about it, because it doesn't
exist, so I don't, I don't quite know, like, I find it really useful, I don't kind of quite know,
like, how it works, if you're not as familiar with R code, like, how do you assess the quality of it,
like, how do you know if it's doing what you want it to do, but I think overall, it's like,
it seems like a big win, like, it lets you kind of rapidly explore things, I use it a bunch when
I'm working in programming languages I'm not that familiar with, or don't use every day,
like, it allows you to get something on the page, and then iterate, which I think is
incredibly powerful, so I think my main encouragement is just, like, you know,
try it out, and see how it works for you. Yeah, big changes. So, okay. I think time is up.
Thank you very much. Thanks for your time, and to be here, so accepting our invitation,
so kind, and everything went so well. Yeah, thanks so much for having me.
Have a good day. Good evening, everyone. Bye. Thank you. Bye-bye. Bye. Bye. Thanks. Thank you.
Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Thanks so much. The recording might go to my cloud. If it does,
I'll share it with you, Federica. Oh, yeah, that's great. Yeah, I have two parts,
so I just restarted this one, so it's still recording, so I should stop it.